In this video we're going to consider the
same problem of an oscillator chain and
the collective modes in the chain.
But now, we're going to start
the quantum collective modes or
quantum phonus in
a quantum oscillator chain.
So, this problem solves very complicated
because we're going to be dealing
with an infinite number of
quantum degrees of freedom now.
But, as we shall see,
actually at the end of the day the results
are going to be very similar to
those in the classical case.
So, namely the spectrum of quantum
phonons apart from the zero point
energy is going to be identical to
the spectrum of classical phonons.
Now, to solve the problem first,
we need to define what we want.
So, let me consider
a slightly simpler version
of what we looked at
in the previous video.
Now I'm going to study an oscillator
chain consisting of the same type of
oscillators and same type of atoms.
So, I have here identical
atoms with a mass M, and
identical oscillators,
identical sort of springs.
Now it's going to be quantum springs
of source with a stiffness case and
this is the x coordinate.
And, the corresponding classical
Hamiltonian associated with this
oscillator chain is presented here.
So, we have a sum of going over
all these atoms, so and here,
is, let's say this is going to be N
equals one, N equals two, N equals three.
So, it just labels the atoms, and
axis of n is the position
of the responding atom.
Now this is, of course, the kinetic
energy, and this is the potential energy.
So, it's essentially the same Hamiltonian
we had before but now just for
a single species of atoms if you look.
Now to go to quantum problem,
we need to quantize this Hamiltonian.
We need to make it quantum.
So, how do we do this?
Well, it turns out that
actually it very easy to do so.
So, it's as easy as it was in the case
of a single harmonic oscillator.
So, all we have to do is just to
put hats on top of h, p and x.
So, which means that we made these
variables in the classic location to
operators in the quantum problems.
So, for example,
if we are working in position space.
So let's say b sub n is simply
the derivative minus i h-bar G over axm.
So it adds solely on
the f coordinate of the.
Now this f and p, they satisfy
the Hamiltonian commutation relations.
So, if they could respond to
the same atoms, so XN and
PN, they commute to IH bar.
If they correspond to a different atom,
let's say if N is not equal to, well let's
see if we've XN and PN, so that's going
to be zero and is not equal to N.
So, we can sort of unify this
competition relation, for
writing the Delta symbol here.
So, which means that it's equal to ih bar
one if n equals to m and zero otherwise.
So, this is what it means to
quantize this Hamiltonian.
So now,
the next step we're going to perform is,
we're going to use our definition of
the creation and operator that were
introduced in the solution of
the single harmonic oscillator.
And, we're going to represent each
coordinate xn and momentum bn through
the corresponding creation and
annihilation operators A and A dagger.
So, here are the same,
you can check going back to the first
segment of the lecture today is at,
that as a matter of fact it's exactly
the same definitions we used before.
But now,
we just have this additional index N
which refers to the atoms in this chain.
And, of course, there's a creation and
annihilation operators.
They satisfy their own canonical
commutation relations as here.
So, they commute with one another,
their commutation is equal to zero
if they responded to different atoms, and
otherwise, if they correspond to the same
atom, a commutator with a dagger m,
is equal to one.
So, what we're going to do now, we're
going to plug in this expression of X and
P through a and
a dagger into this Hamiltonian.
And, let me do that.
So, if we do so,
the Hamiltonian takes this form.
Which actually appears to be a more
complicated looking form since there
are more terms here than we had before.
But, we are on our way
to solving the problem.
So, the strategy for solving
the problem would be actually different
from the sort of typical solution in
single particle quantum mechanics
where we're dealing with
a Schroedinger equation wave function.
So here, of course,
we still would like to solve
the Schroedinger equation we have in
mind this Schroedinger equation, but
we don't worry too much at this stage
about the form of the wave functions.
We just want to know the energies
that are possible in this system.
Just like in the previous video we
just worried about the spectrum
of the dispersion relation
of classical wave.
So, here we want to know the dispersion
relations for quantum waves.
So, how do we do this?
So, in order to solve the problem here,
instead of working with
the wave functions, we're going to be
working with the operators themselves.
And, we're going to try to transform
the Hamiltonian into a new, simpler form.
So, that basically we're going to be
looking for a new set of operators.
We're going to go from the operators,
let's say AN and
AN dagger with all possible N's,
to a new operator.
So, let me call it BQ and BQ dagger.
Such that the form of the Hamiltonian
in terms of this new creation and
annihilation operators is
going to be much simpler
that the form which is written here.
So, basically the challenge here
is to find a linear transformation
of the original operators Into a new form
such that the Hamiltonian, which looks
simple, and that essentially this solution
to this Hamiltonian would be known.
So, this is a bit of a technical
challenge and a technical exercise and
the first step in this exercise is
just to write the Hamiltonian in terms
of this A and A dagger as is.
So, we have to basically expand this
brackets and calculate this square
of these brackets which leads to
a rather lengthy expression that's here.
And.
I have omitted here and overall constant,
there could be constant which corresponds
essentially to an energy shift.
And also, I have written it in
a slightly more friendly form, well,
it's not as long as I could have
written it because of this term which
is a response to Hermitian conjugate.
So, basically I have this guy,
so you can just work it out.
You can work it out as
an exercise if you want.
So, and you will see that you have many,
many churums and each churum
in here must be compensate with
a hermitian conjugate from somewhere else.
Because the Newtonian in the end of
the day must be Hermitian operator.
So, and in this case it simplifies our
life a little bit because we don't have
to write two lengthy expressions,
but still it looks pretty bad.
So, there are a lot of
terms we don't want to see.
So, we don't know with this spectrum,
what the solution of this Hamiltonian is.
We see a bunch of this A and
A daggers in various combinations, and
we see also couplings between
different sides, etcetera, etcetera.
So, in order to solve this, Hamiltonian,
in the way I just described, that is,
to find new set of operators
that simplifies form.
So, just like in the classical case, it's
convenient to perform a Fourier transform.
But now,
it's going to be a Fourier transform, for
the creation and
annihilation operators themselves.
So, what we have here is a representation
of the annihilation here and the creation
operators in terms of some other
operators, A's of Q and A's of Q dagger.
So, I use the same symbols.
But, this is really a different operator.
And so, this a D sub Q are in
a sense images of this A sub N.
And so, the two are related
by this Fourier transform,
which now is an integral
going from minus pi to pi.
So, and it starts from minus infinity to
plus infinity because we have a periodic
array of these oscillators,
not the continuum oscillators.
So, it's actually more like for
a series rather than for
a transform that we're using.
In any case, I'll be using this symbol
here so integral with the subscript
W to sort of label all of
the terms that I have here.
And, in these notations, for example,
the Fourier-transform of the creation
operator is presented here.
So, it can be obtained from this one
simply by conjugating both sides.
That's why I have a minus sign here
as opposed to a plus sign here.
So, there are a couple of identities that
I want to emphasize without deriving them.
So the first one is
the sum over all integers,
basically over all
the oscillators in our problem.
And so N goes from zero plus minus one,
plus minus two, etcetera.
So, and if I sum over all these N's,
these exponentials will give rise
to two pi times the delta function.
And, sort of the inverse identity to it,
if I integrate the exponential,
from minus pi to pi.
So, then the right hand side
is going to be delta symbol.
So, this integral is equal to zero
if N is not equal to zero and
is equal to one,
well [INAUDIBLE] otherwise.
I'm mentioning these identities because
they're very useful in driving a form of
the Hamiltonian in the q-space
from the Hamiltonian we
derived in the previous slide in real
space which was dependant on the index N.
And, this valuation which
takes a little bit of time and
effort I will leave mostly to you.
And, this will be one of problems in your
upcoming homework for self assessment,
and probably this is going to be
the most complicated problem there.
However, there is one important identity
of that one to prove explicitly here.
And, this will be an identity
involving a commutator
of two Q-space operators.
So, again, our goal would be to
rewrite the Newtonian in terms of
this A's of Q and A's of Q dagger.
And, I refer to these guys as
annihilation and creation operators, but
I haven't proven that they
are indeed such operators.
So, what does it mean for them to
be creation annihilation operators?
So, it would mean that they satisfy
certain type of commutation relations
similar to the canonical commutation
relations we have discussed
in the previous lecture.
So, in these permutation relations for
the real space operators, A sub N, or
let's say A sub N dagger, we know
that this is delta symbol of N and M.
So, now we want to check what kind of
limitation relations these guys satisfy,
and in order for me to work it out,
work out these commutation relations, I'm
going to use an inverse Fourier transform.
So, let's say the first term
in this commutation relation,
A sub Q one,
can be written as a sum over N one..
A sub N one into minus I Q one N one,
so this is an inverse
Fourier transform in some sense
opposite to this guy here.
And, the second term here
is going to involve sum,
let's say over N two, A dagger N two,
either the part plus I Q two N two.
And, this responds to
the Fourier-transform sort
of reversing this relation.
So, now the commutator only
cares about the operator.
So, all, and this is a linear operation.
So we can factor out,
in some sense, this sum and
we can factor out these exponentials.
So, derive this commutation
relation as so.
So, it's going to be a sum or N one and
N two E to the power I,
Q two N two minus Q one N one.
And, here I'm going to have the commutator
of a sub N one A dagger sub N two.
And so, if we now compare this
canonical computation, or relation,
with this guy, then we're going
to see that this is nothing but
delta symbol of N one and N two.
Which means that it sort of extracts
just one term out of this sum.
Where N one is equal to N two, and
what we can do,
we can simply set N one equals to N two.
And let's say, we will set N one equals
N two and equals to some other N.
And so,
we're going to arrive it as follows,
it's going to be equal to the sum over N.
Now E to the power I Q
two minus Q one times N.
And, that's it, so the operators are done.
And now, at this stage we're going
to use finally this identity,
the first identity that I just defined and
we'll write the final results.
So, we make sure we write it in red.
And, it's going to be equal to two Pi
delta function of Q one minus Q two,
Q two minus Q one.
So, in this to be compared with this
canonical commutation relation.
So, you can see, of course, here
this is in some sense a continued version
of this canonical commutation relation.
And, this means, actually, that these
guys, A sub Q one, well, A sub Q and
A sub Q dagger, the two represent
annihilation and creation operators.
But, what do these creation and
annihilation operators create or destroy?
So, like A sub N and
A sub N dagger, which sort of create
a local oscillations of a particular
side of a particular oscillator somewhere
in the well defined position in space.
So, these A's of Q, and
A's of Q dagger, they annihilate and
create waves that go on propagating
through the, oscillator chain.
So, these guys are not local in space.
They instead create waves
with a certain wave vector.
And Q basically is the wave vector.
So, here, again, I'm using the units
where the lengths are measured in
the units of the oscillator length.
So, the distance between
the neighboring equilibrium size, but
in any case so this is really
the interpretation of what we're doing.
And now, if we plugin these
expressions into the Hamiltonian
in the previous slide, and
we use these identities and
other simple algebraic manipulations
we're going to arrive at the following
expression for the same Hamiltonian.
So, this is actually the very same
Hamiltonian we started with, but
now rewritten in terms of this A sub Q,
and A sub Q dagger.
And, while it's not at all obvious
that this is the result and
while this capital A and
capital B, its coefficients here have
this form, and it's not obvious at all.
So, this actually to derive this
guy would be a challenge for
you in the bonus problem
of your homework here.